The History of the Comp-o-Tron Corporation


The seeds that sprouted the Comp-o-Tron Corporation were planted in the
heady days following the second world war. With both Hirohito and Hitler
awaiting trial in The Hauge, 1947 ended with a bang as a crack team of
researchers at Bell Labs announced the invention of the transistor.

Upon taking office in 1948, President Dewey announced a ground-breaking
consortium between industry, academia, and government. Drawn by promises
of good salaries and royalty-free patent licensing, corporations,
researchers, and engineers flocked to the project. At the time, President
Dewey predicted a "tenfold increase in development velocity" for the
effort, dubbed "Project Brooklyn".

While we have no way of evaluating President Dewey's claims, it is clear
that the open communications fostered by Project Brooklyn have borne fruit.
By 1949, development efforts had shifted from germanium to silicon, and
engineers had begun to create perfect silicon crystals in increasingly
larger sizes.

Inexpensive dual-junction transistors hit the open market in 1951, in time
for manufacturers to create pocket-sized radios for the Christmas season.

Also in 1951, Walter Pfistermonger formed the Pfistermonger Transistorized
Computing Corporation, which was focused on making fully-transistorized
computing devices - no vacuum tubes were allowed in the factory. The
corporation was soon renamed to Comp-o-Tron, Inc., based on input from
Pfistermonger's seven-year-old daughter, Edith.

The Comp-o-Tron Model 1 was powered on in late 1952. Never intended for
production, this proof-of-concept machine was an early success for the
company. Aside from the power supply (which was purchashed off-the-shelf),
the Model 1 was entirely transistorized and functioned entirely on
Boolean mathematical principles.

The decision to build the Model 1 with fully-modular architecture bore
early fruit when the plummeting price of transistors allowed engineers
to change from a 6-bit-wide bus to a 9-bit-wide bus midway through the
program, with minimal impact to cost or schedule.

Edith Pfistermonger, now eight years old, was given the honor of pressing
the "RUN" button for the first program execution. Much to her delight, the
Model 1 printed "Hello, Edith." on the attached Print-o-Tron. To this day,
the first program written by any new engineer at Comp-o-Tron is the
"Hello, Edith" program, and a copy of this program is shipped with
each and every new Comp-o-Tron computing device.

By 1953, the first Multi-Gate Devices (MTGs) began to emerge from the labs.
These devices, with two or sometimes three transistors integrated onto a
single slab of silicon, changed the way designers thought about circuits.
It was clear that slabs were the way forward.

The engineers at Comp-o-Tron did not miss this trend. Plans for the Model
2 were rapidly shelved in favor of the slab-based Model 3. Because it was
apparent that logic slabs were going to provide paired and quad logic
blocks, the basic modular component of the device was changed from three
bits to four. The planned 12-bit Model 2 now became a 16-bit Model 3.

This change caused a lot of excitement and interest (and deposits) from
potential customers. A 16-bit bus would allow a whopping 65,536 storage
words, each storing values up to 65,536. But who could afford that much
storage? The total cost would be hundreds of millions of dollars.

Enter a scrappy bunch of engineers from California, newly graduated from
the California Technological Institution. They had developed a new type of
experimental semiconductor memory called Capacitor Auto-Refresh Dynamic
Storage, or CARDS. The directors of Comp-o-Tron, seeing an opportunity,
bought the CARDS company outright, paying the founders handsomely for their
work.

Although the patents could not remain exclusive to Comp-o-Tron under the
rules of the Brooklyn Project, the company was still in an advantageous
position. Comp-o-Tron computers, which were already transistor-based, were
easily adapted use the new CARDS memory, dubbed Stor-o-Tron for the market.

Released in fall of 1954, the Model 3 was a huge success for Comp-o-Tron,
selling well over 200 machines to government, business and academia. Users
tout its small size (smaller than the family car!), low power and cooling
requirements, and ease of programming. If any computing device could be
considered a "hit", it is the Comp-o-Tron Model 3.

The Comp-o-Tron Model 3 was accompanied by some outstanding peripheral
devices as well. The Print-o-Tron XL full-width matrix imager is able to
print a full page of standard pink-bar paper in 3 seconds flat. And the
Card-o-Tron 3CS combination card scanner/puncher is able to read and
write high-density Comp-o-Tron cards as well as the low-density Hollerith
cards used by CTC equipment.

In 1955, Comp-o-Tron engineers doubled down, with the release of the
record-setting Tape-o-Tron 1200: a magnetic tape device capable of reading
and writing data at an astounding 1200 bits per second - four times the
industry standard.

And now, in 1956, the Comp-o-Tron Corporation is prepared once again to
upend the industry. Originally dubbed the Model 6 (because its bus is twice
as wide as that of the Model 3), the new computing device is now officially
named the Comp-o-Tron 6000.

Constructed almost entirely of multi-gate slabs, the Comp-o-Tron 6000 is
tiny -- the size of an ordinary four-drawer file cabinet -- and sips power,
able to run off an ordinary 20-Ampere household circuit. And its 32-bit bus
is able to access, in theory, over 4 billion words of local storage.

Although this mind-boggling storage size is impossible to build today, the
Comp-o-Tron 6000 is ready when the technology catches up, possibly as soon
as 1960! Meanwhile, configurations are available with capacities ranging
from 16,384 words to an astounding 512 thousand words, with millions of
words expected to be available in 1957.

Speed? The Model 6000 has that too, able to execute commands at a rate
more than twice that of the Model 3 -- up to 300,000 cycles per second,
another world record. And because the bus is twice as wide, each of those
300,000 cycles can process twice as much data.

The Comp-o-Tron 6000 already supports the Print-o-Tron XL, the Card-o-Tron
3CS, and the Tape-o-Tron 1200. Introduced alongside the 6000 is the amazing
new Disc-o-Tron, which is a fully-addressable magnetic platter device
capable of storing up to 2,000,000 words of information. The Disc-o-Tron
can access any word on its massive platters within 2 seconds!

Comp-o-Tron computing devices have always had a reputation for easy
programming, and the 6000 is no different. While the 32-bit instruction
codes are all-new, they are laid out in an easy-to-understand fashion
and can be hand-assembled with minimal effort. Even better, a full
symbolic assembler is included with each Comp-o-Tron computing device.

But Comp-o-Tron isn't standing still. We've invested heavily in high-level
languages and have borrowed some top talent from the United States Navy.
This team is right now putting the finishing touches on a new business-
oriented high-level language that we call "Type-o-Tron Business". Software
to support this language will be available in late 1956 and will support the
Comp-o-Tron 6000 AND sufficiently-configured Model 3 devices.

Additionally, Comp-o-Tron is cooperating with the CTC Corporation on a new
science-oriented language that we call "Type-o-Tron Formula". While this
language is early in development, we expect to unveil it to the public in
1957, with software tools available soon after.

It's an exciting time for the computing device industry, and Comp-o-Tron
is at the forefront. Who knows what the future will bring?

We know - it will bring new and more exciting Comp-o-Tron computing
devices! And each and every one of them will print "Hello, Edith" when it
is first powered on.
